In the two decades following
the Second World War,
the British aircraft industry
flourished
in a pageant of ingenuity
and innovation.
REPORTER: A brilliant new
all-British achievement made
headline news throughout the world.
Aviation was Britain's largest
industry and for a few golden years,
it led the world.
REPORTER: Britain's Comet
jet airliner
has again been breaking
records.
Whichever way you looked at it, there
was no plane like it in the world.
Britain had invented the jet engine
and proven it in warplanes
but the new jet age was set to
change passenger transport, too.
People couldn't understand how a jet
aircraft actually worked.
It was a sort of magic, in a way.
Things could happen.
Britain could make it.
We were giving to reach for the sky.
Tails up for Britain.
Aircraft and the men who flew them
were the stars of the age.
Thousands flocked to witness
the daring feats of pilots
like "Cat's Eyes" Cunningham,
wartime night fighter ace.
We needed our heroes.
God knows we needed our heroes.
Sometimes, the confidence
was shaken by tragedy.
But this was the age of the jet,
when Britain ruled the skies.
It was going to be
the aeroplane that showed
that we were still world players.
When Queen Elizabeth came to the
throne,
a lot was happening for Britain.
We were coming out of austerity,
ration books were soon to end,
Hillary and Tenzing climbed
to the top of Mount Everest,
Roger Bannister ran a mile
in under four minutes.
REPORTER: The tape has broken,
and so is the record athletes have
long been dreaming about.
Look at that excitement.
Look at those achievements.
There was a kind of feeling,
that was being quite shamelessly
promoted on all sides,
of the new Elizabethan era,
leading to a kind of Renaissance,
a rebirth of British enterprise.
Thank God we could now put
the War behind us,
but use a lot of the technology
we developed in the War
for peaceful purposes.
Foremost among those technologies
was a new generation of jets,
powerful enough to turn these new
Elizabethans
into world leaders in civil
aviation.
REPORTER: Here it is.
In the precise language
of the engineer,
it's called a jet propulsion
gas turbine.
To you and me, it's the jet engine,
one of the marvels of this century
of marvels.
The jet engine was world beating
technology and it was British.
REPORTER: To Farnborough for the
world's greatest airshow.
Britain's faith in jets justified
and prominent among them,
the Avro Ashton.
This is a development of the Tudor
with four jet engines
installed in pairs.
It will be used for experimental
work on high-altitude jet flights.
Altogether, of the 60 planes
on show, nearly half were jets.
The Farnborough airshow was the
showcase for the best of British.
Every September, crowds would flock
to Hampshire
to see the most amazing aircraft
the country could produce.
They were family days of picnics,
charabancs and stiff necks.
Going to the Farnborough airshow
as a child was a magical experience.
You saw wonderful,
modern aircraft
that felt so close you could
reach out and touch them.
They were doing aerobatics,
they were nearly all demonstrated
by test pilots
who could make them
do wonderful things
and to see this was so inspiring.
I never, ever grew
out of wanting to be a pilot.
Gosh! She's wizard.
It was the best of British
technology
and you had this wonderful meeting
of all sections of British society.
You saw the latest civil planes,
soaring round, performing near
aerobatics right over your head.
As a child, that was
just glorious stuff.
The aircraft names seemed magical.
Fairey and English Electric,
Sopwith and Supermarine,
Vickers-Armstrong, Handley Page,
Hunting, Saunders-Roe and Short,
Gloucester and de Havilland,
Bristol and Blackburn.
It seemed incredible
that in peace time,
one small country could still
sustain so many manufacturers,
turning out so many promising
aircraft.
REPORTER: Final verdict
on Farnborough,
Britain's aircraft industry
consolidates its supremacy.
But these bright new aircraft
were the results of secret plans
laid in the darkest days of war.
ALARM BELL RINGS
With the outbreak of World War II,
all production of civil aircraft
had halted
to concentrate on the fighters
and bombers that would protect
our shores.
As early as 1942, however,
a committee was set up
to plan the peace time future
of British civil aviation.
The Brabazon Committee was set up,
really, in the depths of the War
but at least we had El Alamein
and Stalingrad,
so it looked like we were
going to win.
So the problem was then,
how was Britain going to use its big
aircraft industry
to try and compete
with the Americans
when the Americans have got
all the transport aircraft
while we've been building fighters
and bombers?
And led by Lord Brabazon,
the man who had the first pilot's
licence in Britain,
and the famous numberplate,
FLY1, to prove it,
he and the team came up
with a set of aircraft
that they believed,
in the long-term,
would allow Britain
to prove its worth
and compete on world air routes.
The Brabazon Committee decided
that Britain needed
a family of planes to serve short
and medium haul,
domestic and European destinations
and the long haul flights
of the north Atlantic
and the routes of Empire.
With this masterplan in place,
tenders went out to leading
manufacturers.
The result was extraordinary.
An astonishing outpouring
of wildly different passenger
aircraft designs,
all been produced simultaneously.
At the time, jet propulsion was fast
but much too thirsty
for long haul flights.
Watch that gallon go!
So Type I
on the Brabazon Committee's list
was a massive petrol-driven,
piston-engined aircraft.
Unveiled in 1949,
this leviathan promised splendid,
luxurious travel for the rich
and privileged.
Awe-inspiring, jaw-droppingly huge.
REPORTER: Here she comes.
130 tonnes of superlative
engineering.
Six years of research,
ingenuity, invention.
Sycophantically,
Bristol named this aircraft
after the great Lord himself.
It was henceforth
the Bristol Brabazon.
Creating a liner of the air,
passengers would travel in style.
They would have their own bunks
in private cabins, powder rooms,
a cocktail bar
and even a separate cinema.
Chief test pilot on the Brabazon
and was Bill Pegg.
He had worked stolidly for Bristol
since the mid '30s.
Crowds would gather
wherever it flew.
Faster, faster! The nose wheel
is off! The nose wheel is off!
I'm looking to see the main wheel.
The main wheel's come off.
She's off!
She's hopped along the grass!
The Brabazon is in the air!
The Brabazon was designed
to cruise at 250 mph,
carrying 100 passengers, and take
17 hours to fly the Atlantic.
The Brabazon was a good idea
at the time.
They assumed that with a new
generation of piston engines,
it would become very much
more efficient.
It was built for
the transatlantic route.
The wingspan of the Brabazon
was 11 metres greater
than that of a jumbo jet.
It was stupendously huge.
It was an aircraft
that really harked back
to the pre-war concept of flying,
that it would be only
for the very wealthy.
They were after the first-class
passengers from the Queen Mary
and if you were going to cram them
for 17 hours crossing the Atlantic,
they needed space, they needed
stewards, they needed a dining room.
The Brabazon pioneered
high-pressure hydraulics
and electric engine controls.
But the aircraft was unmistakably
old, piston-driven technology,
out of time and out of place
in the new Elizabethan age.
By 1953, no airline had ordered her.
Impressive as she was,
her future was the scrapheap,
without ever taking
a fare-paying customer.
A contemporary of the Brabazon,
the Vickers Viscount may have had
propellers
but it was what lay behind them
that made the difference,
and that was the jet turbine.
The aircraft was revolutionary
because it introduced a new kind
of engine, the turboprop engine,
which is basically a jet engine
with a propeller on the front.
The major advantage with
the turboprop engine, of course,
is fuel economy.
It was so much cheaper to run
than a piston engine aircraft.
REPORTER: The propeller turbine is
not a stand-in for the pure jet.
The air screw is still considered
the most efficient
medium for transforming power
into thrust.
The designer of the Vickers Viscount
was the legendary,
if somewhat tight-lipped,
George Edwards.
It was clear to us
as far back as 1945,
that this was a great advance
on anything that had gone before.
An ordinary,
conventional engine vibrates
because of the pistons jumping up
and down inside it.
Imagine what 14 pistons must do
in just one engine
running at 25,000 piston
movements a minute.
The propeller turbine,
on the other hand,
has no up-and-down moving parts
such as pistons or valves.
This is how it works.
Air is drawn in at the front,
compressed in the compressor
and pushed into the combustion
chamber.
There it's heated and it rushes
through the turbine.
The turbine drives the compressor
and in turn a propeller.
The exhaust provides jet propulsion
so that no power is wasted.
So we designed an aeroplane
to give us speed, range, economy
and four-engine reliability.
We built it and we called it
the Viscount.
I name this aircraft Discovery.
May God bless her and all who fly
with her. Hip, hip, hurray!
The first aircraft had entered
service in 1950,
well ahead of schedule.
The nursing mother of the Viscount
was BEA, British European Airways.
The Viscount was funded by them and
tightly designed around their needs.
But its performance and comfort
proved enduringly popular
with airlines and passengers
all around the world.
Nowadays, people have no idea,
because they've never flown in
a propeller driven aircraft,
how incredibly noisy
and uncomfortable they are.
Bumpy and constant vibration.
Suddenly, with the Viscount,
all that went
and they were flying higher
because it was a pressurised cabin,
above the weather.
It was smooth, it was wonderful
and passengers just loved it.
We're off! Isn't it super?
REPORTER: This 50-seater medium
ranged airliner,
with a cruising speed
of 312 miles an hour,
is powered by four turbo propeller
engines.
She is here seen flying
with three of them.
The Viscount is arguably
the most successful
British airliner ever built.
Maybe not in numbers, but as far
as success around the world.
REPORTER: The American visitors were
so impressed with the workmanship,
economy and design
that they signed a contract for
three of the aircraft to the value
of over a million pounds
and what's more, they have taken
an option on a further 37.
The Viscount will be the first
British airliner
on a scheduled service in America.
As Americans did not have
a turboprop of their own,
the Viscount was the ideal aircraft
to take on the all-important
US market.
Not only did capital airlines
fly the Viscount,
they also admired its virtues in
that warming, homespun way that only
Americans can fake.
Yes, it's a new standard of service.
Capital Airlines' Viscount.
If you've been riding in the cockpit
of aeroplanes as long as I have,
it's a real thrill to see a plane
like the Viscount come along.
It's tops with the pilots.
Capital Airlines is proud of over
a quarter of a century
of serving air-minded America
and we're extremely proud
to be the first carrier
in the United States to introduce
the Viscount, with its four engines.
The Viscount also proved its worth
in the harshest conditions.
Captain Ron MacDonald was
a pilot for Trans-Canada Air.
Most of my flying was in the
Maritimes, which we call in Canada,
which is New Brunswick, Nova Scotia
and Newfoundland.
The weather, of course,
was quite atrocious at times,
in the Maritimes, but the Viscount
was an extremely stable aircraft
to make an approach on,
so that you can get her down in 200
foot ceilings of heavy rain or snow
and it was an excellent aeroplane
for the environment
that we had to use it in.
We had become the top airline
in North America,
using the best equipment
that was available.
The Viscount,
with its Rolls-Royce Dart engines
was an instant hit
with the passengers.
Smooth enough not to shake
the Babycham,
quiet enough to have a conversation.
And with windows large enough
to watch the world go by.
These must be the Alps.
Let me see!
Don't jump about!
You can see quite clearly.
The window's bigger than you are.
By the end of its production,
over 450 Viscounts would
fly worldwide for 80 airlines.
A great British plane.
But the key thing about it was,
it did what it was supposed to do,
which is why a fairly large number
of passengers fairly economically,
because it was a turboprop
rather than a pure jet,
from Stuttgart to London or
from Arizona to Nebraska or whatever.
Which is why the plane
sold in America.
The Americans didn't have a plane
which could do that job.
The Viscount was a short haul
aircraft.
On the long haul transatlantic
passenger routes,
it was the Americans who
still dominated.
They used mass production,
piston-driven aircraft that were
modelled on World War II technology.
Their Constellation was developed
from a wartime military transport.
While the Superfortress bomber
became the Boeing Stratocruiser.
The Stratocruiser
could carry 55 passengers
and had, as a feature, a spiral
staircase down to a cocktail bar.
In the '50s, even Britain's
intercontinental airline BOAC,
the British Overseas Airways
Corporation,
flew Uncle Sam's planes.
But American technology was old
technology. Noisy, '40s technology.
Britain had the jet
and with our next big jet-powered
aircraft of the '50s,
it looked as if we would land
the killer blow.
REPORTER: Britain's aircraft
may have a winner in the Comet.
I quote the sober view
of aviation critics.
The de Havilland company
have produced
this four-engine jet airliner,
the first in the world,
largely from experiments
carried out on the little 108.
The pilots are famous war ace
Cunningham and Johnny Wilson.
Cunningham talks
to Sir Frank Whittle on the left,
the inventor of the jet.
No airliner came close
to the Comet's beauty or speed,
the distinctive whistle of its ghost
engines thrilling the crowd
wherever it went.
It was a jetliner that could
travel twice as high
and twice as fast as anything else.
Smooth and high above the weather,
it was a transportive delight
and at least five years ahead
of anything proposed by our rivals.
It was the shape of things to come.
Suddenly, out of very often things
which were little more than sheds and
garages and fairly rundown buildings,
people had conceived the future.
A completely new way of flying
and a completely new way
of looking at aeroplanes.
What struck me about it was
you looked at this magnificent silver
aircraft
and you looked at the surroundings
of the silver aircraft,
which are chaps in cloth caps,
ancient movie cameras
trying to film this plane,
in the middle of it is something
that is utterly timeless.
To make the vision reality,
de Havilland needed sales in volume
and that meant getting the backing
of the state-funded British Overseas
Airways Corporation.
Only they could guarantee
the Comet's success.
There were plenty of reasons
for caution.
For one thing, air routes all over
the world were only equipped
to handle aeroplanes
travelling about half the speed
and half the height of a Comet.
Of course there were
plenty of reasons for caution
but get sufficient numbers of the
new aircraft into service quickly
and Britain might, at one stroke,
find herself years ahead
of her competitors.
The Comet was stunning
when it first emerged.
It had been kept secret,
under wartime levels of secrecy,
until it rolled out in July 1949
and then, of course,
it caused a sensation.
It was so new, so sleek,
so silver, so beautiful.
The Comet, with its signature square
windows and rakishly swept wings,
shrank the globe.
The first four-jet airliner,
Britain's already famous Comet,
made worldwide news by its
astonishing flight to North Africa
and back.
This wonderful machine's
total time in the air
for a distance
of just under 3,000 miles
was a mere six hours, 38 minutes.
De Havilland's test pilot,
John Cunningham,
was the quintessential company man,
always facing every interview
with a broad, innocent smile.
And it gave us an average speed,
from take-off to flying over
the airfield at the other end,
of about 450 miles an hour.
London to Copenhagen
in one hour, 18 minutes.
The newspapers of the time,
free of any doubt,
proclaimed the Comet
as a world-beater.
Karachi, flying time,
ten hours, 21 minutes.
It was at a time when I went off
to interview John Cunningham.
He told me that soon after
he first flew it,
a test pilot from Lockheed,
and Lockheed, at the time,
was one of the principal American
aircraft manufacturers,
Cunningham took that Lockheed pilot
up in the Comet to 30,000 feet.
The Lockheed pilot was completely
blown away by it.
He said, "I cannot believe this
plane. This is unbelievable."
And it was.
It represented the future.
And for a country which had
run out of money,
which Britain had
at the end of the '40s,
a country whose achievements were
vast and largely in the past
and whose present was one of
being in hock to the Americans
for evermore,
this suddenly seemed to represent
a get out of austerity easily.
And that, I think,
is one of the reasons why
the Comet was so important then.
I remember going to Heathrow,
dragging my mother to Heathrow,
to see the Comet
when the old Northside passenger
terminals were canvas tents, mostly.
And then this wonderful silver
apparition with the BOAC markings,
whining as it rolled by.
This great howl
from the ghost engines.
Took your breath away. It was
so lovely, so smooth. Terrific.
Sir Miles Thomas, chairman of BOAC,
greeted the Queen
and Duke of Edinburgh at London's
British Industries Fair.
The Royal attention focused
on a scale model Comet,
for a few days before,
this record-breaking aircraft
had again made the front pages
by going into regular service
as the world's first
passenger-carrying jet airline.
The Comet's first scheduled service
was the air mail run
down to Rome and on to Africa
and the dominions of the Empire
to set down finally in Johannesburg.
Excuse me, gentleman.
We shall be arriving
at Ciampino Airport, Rome,
in about five minutes.
There will be an airport official
to meet you and take you
to the restaurant, where you will
be served with afternoon tea.
In London operations room,
news of the Comet's landing
was flashed from Rome.
What time did they arrive there?
1533. 1533. One minute late.
Could you put it up for me, please?
Yes. Certainly.
As we approached Entebbe,
we saw Lake Victoria beneath us.
A 200-mile stretch
of shimmering water
right at the end of the runway.
Before we reached Livingstone,
Captain Marston came in to see
how we were getting along.
It may be a bit turbulent.
I don't guarantee it every time!
ENGINE ROAR DROWNS SPEECH
Oh, well, that's not too bad, is it?
It shows it's all very smooth,
this flight, isn't it?
And as I was searching my mind
for the words to describe
this completely new experience
in flying,
our destination came into view
and below us lay
the great blocks of city buildings
and the golden slag heaps
from the mines.
The roots of Empire
were still vital.
Yes, the writing was on the wall.
It was clearly going to be axed,
slowly or quickly, nobody quite new.
India had already gone in '47.
But we had large areas
of the planet to control
and military to get out there
and to service
and civil servants
and all the rest of it.
So, right to the Far East,
right down to the south,
southern tip of Africa,
we had to preserve air routes.
Orders started to pour in
from Air France,
Air India, Japan, Venezuela
and Brazil
and even from the United States.
But then curious accidents
started to happen
that had not featured
during Cunningham's testing.
This Comet belly-landed on Rome's
Ciampino airfield at takeoff.
Not one of the 36 passengers
or crew of six was hurt,
a fact which reflects credit
on the jet airliner,
as well as on the coolness
and skill of its pilot.
The design of the Comet's wings
appeared vulnerable
to stalling on takeoff,
a problem known as over rotation.
The pilots could actually raise
the nose of the aircraft
too high on takeoff, which disturbed
the airflow into the engine,
it dropped its efficiency
and also disturbed the airflow over
the wings and that killed the lift.
Conversely,
if you didn't rotate enough,
you just never took off at all.
You remained in ground effect.
So it was very tricky.
John Cunningham, one of the finest
test pilots in the world,
he knew the aeroplane so well
that he never got himself
into an over rotate position.
But on a dark, rainy night,
which airline pilots work in,
test pilots very rarely do,
the situation is quite different.
The first accident seemed
like straightforward pilot error
but then one of Ron MacDonald's
Canadian friends,
Captain Charles Pentland,
crashed on takeoff in Karachi,
killing all on board.
Everybody thought that Charlie was
the one man that would never
get himself into this situation.
Unfortunately, over rotation occurred
and the aircraft never left
the ground.
It just went off the runway
and blew up and killed everybody.
So it was apparently maybe
the instrumentation
didn't give you the degrees of pitch
that you required,
which we had on later aircraft.
The real problem with the Comet
was that, being a jet aircraft,
it was much less forgiving
than propeller-driven aircraft.
Mostly because you don't have the
slipstream going back over
the control surfaces until it's
already reached quite a fast speed.
The problem is that all the people
who flew it
and all the people who maintained it
were still thinking vaguely of the
propeller era.
They didn't realise that the jet era
was something totally different.
While de Havilland set about
addressing
the problems of the Comet,
their competitors, Bristol,
had come up with an aircraft
to challenge the Americans on the
transatlantic routes.
Bristol needed fuel efficiency
so they chose the turboprop.
This new aircraft
they called the Britannia.
REPORTER: The age
of the second Elizabeth,
bringing with it craftsmanship that
leads the designs of the world.
Bristol Britannia was actually
a rather beautiful looking plane.
It was also, in theory,
a plane the world needed.
It was a turboprop
but it was quite fast.
350, 400 miles an hour.
It could deliver quite
a lot of passengers
and it could deliver them
over quite a long distance.
So in some ways, at that time,
it seemed, from a British
standpoint, quite a good idea.
REPORTER: The Britannia.
The airliner of tomorrow.
The plane's first public
appearance
had been at Farnborough
in September 1952.
The test pilot was the vastly
experienced Bill Pegg,
the man who had first flown
the ill-fated Brabazon.
REPORTER: A lovely,
graceful machine.
It ranks as a milestone equal to
the regular services of the Comet.
Spectators were astounded
at the quietness of the plane
and it was soon nicknamed
the "Whispering Giant".
The forerunner of a fleet on order
for the British Overseas Airways
Corporation was the star,
the 100-seater Bristol Britannia
turboprop liner.
The Britannia gave a striking
foretaste of the future in a year
of aviation history.
But here, too,
problems started to appear.
There were persistent
teething faults
with the Bristol Proteus engines.
Bill Pegg, who has Bristol's chief
test pilot,
was showing some KLM people,
potential customers,
how the Britannia worked
and all the rest of it
and took off for a flight
from Filton
and flew them up over South Wales.
At one point,
one of the engines developed
a serious fault and caught fire.
Eventually,
the entire wing was in flames
and knowing that there were 2,000
gallons of fuel in it,
Bill Pegg was a little alarmed
about this
and I think the
KLM people were, too.
Obviously, you couldn't do a crash
landing in the mountains of Wales.
My father was sitting in the back
with one of the KLM personnel.
The other one was in the right-hand
seat, Pegg in the left-hand seat.
I would rather not refer to it
as a terrible crash in the
River Severn of the Britannia
in February 1954.
It, in fact, was a controlled forced
landing after an engine fire
developed in number three.
The fire had been raging
for about 20 minutes
and they were quietly working out
how long the structural integrity
and systems would continue to operate
on the starboard wing.
What they were frightened of was
that the fire would be so intense,
because it was fanned
by the slipstream,
that it would actually
start melting the main spar,
at which point,
the whole wing folds up.
The whole lot of them would die.
So he had to get to
the ground as quickly as possible
and over the Severn, he could
see that the estuary tide was out.
He landed on the mud flat and they
slid about 400 yards and then turned
slightly towards the sea and came to
a halt and the fire was out,
because the engines had inhaled so
much mud, it had stopped the fire.
Everybody came out perfectly
unscathed and all the rest of it,
and congratulated Bill Pegg.
There was relief when they got out
but that's about it.
I have to say that KLM did not
buy the aircraft.
Meanwhile, for the Comet,
the world's only jet liner,
things had gone from bad
to much worse.
REPORTER: This is the tragic scene
of the Comet disaster near Calcutta.
Wreckage of the aircraft smashed
almost beyond recognition.
At the time of this terrible
accident,
the aircraft carried 37 passengers
and a crew of six.
All lost their lives.
The reputation of the world's
most celebrated aircraft
now hung in the balance.
There is a curious tone
in the British press at the time.
You will find people...
It almost seems to come over
that it's your patriotic duty
to fly in a Comet.
There are articles in which they
suggest the plane may be sabotaged.
Within six weeks,
with typical British aplomb,
two plucky Royals were dispatched
to Rhodesia on, of course, a Comet.
The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh
were at London airport
only a few hours after their return
from Scotland
to see Queen Elizabeth,
the Queen Mother
and Princess Margaret
off on their flight
to Southern Rhodesia.
And then tragedy struck
on a grand scale.
In January 1954 and again in April,
two Comets fell from the skies
into the Mediterranean,
killing all crew and passengers.
The first had been the very plane
that had set records
on that inaugural flight
to Johannesburg.
35 people were on board,
including ten children,
and there were no survivors.
It was imperative that the cause
of the disaster should be known.
Underwater television cameras,
built by scientists and technicians
in a number of days,
were rushed to the scene
and operated by the Royal Navy.
The wrecked aircraft was located
and salvage operations began.
Brought ashore, too, were
the infinitely moving reminders
of those whose lives were
lost in this disaster of the air.
When I was at school,
I must have been around 11 or 12,
I received an Air Mail letter
from my uncle who was in Hong Kong.
And it was almost illegible
because it was all water stained
and the address had run
and everything
and it turned out that it had been
on one of the Comets
that had crashed in the Mediterranean
and it was one of the letters they
have managed to fish out and deliver.
It was very strange and slightly
uncanny, slightly spooky,
which I think is probably
why I never actually kept it.
The Comet fleet
was immediately grounded,
pending a full scale investigation.
All foreign orders were cancelled.
Barely a year after the fanfares,
it seemed as if the Last Post
had sounded for the Comet.
At the Royal Aircraft Establishment
at Farnborough, they pieced together
the remains of the wreckage and
forensically analysed the results.
This was the most painstaking
and thorough safety examination
in British aviation history.
When the Comet was grounded
as a result of the accident,
they had no idea as to why, because,
of course, there were no black boxes
or anything like that in those days.
They took a Comet fuselage
down to Farnborough
and subjected it to constant cycles
of pressure in a water tank.
REPORTER: After it had been filled,
jacks beneath the wings
caused a series of bumps
as if in flight
and internal pressure
was raised in the fuselage.
After the equivalent of 5,000
three-hour flights,
metal fatigue resulted in cracks
and brakes.
They discovered that a crack
had formed
in a communications aerial
at the corner of it,
up near the cockpit above it.
Then that had spread along the
corners of the windows.
Of course, it had all happened
in an absolute split second.
These key points
of the Comet's fuselage
had been put under unbearable
strain
by repeated ascents and descents
at high altitude.
The Comet's metal skin had failed
just forward of its distinctive
square windows.
Then the cabin had exploded
from the rapid decompression.
And they did several slow motion
films of a mock-up of this happening
and they realised
that the sudden decompression,
death would have been instantaneous
for all of the passengers.
With seats being simply torn out
and turned upside down.
The whole inside of the cabin
becomes a complete maelstrom
of bodies and seats and everything
and that would have happened
in a fifth of a second, less.
Hindsight is always a wonderful thing
and it would be easy for us
to look back at the disasters
the Comet faced in the early 1950s
and say, "We can see what was wrong.
"It had oblong windows
with square edges
"instead of circular windows
or oval windows.
"Of course, these would break up
and there would be metal fatigue."
Well, what did people know?
They didn't know that.
We can be clever now but remember,
the Comet was brand-new.
It was a new type of aircraft.
A very, very high-speed
passenger jet.
One had never been built before.
New metals, new stress skins
on aircraft, this is all new stuff
and the designers
were entering a new dimension.
Mistakes could be made.
More than ever, Britain needed the
turboprop Bristol Britannia
to succeed.
But engine icing problems
and the new,
more rigorous
Air Ministry safety testing
pushed the plane further
and further behind schedule.
REPORTER: This is called
a drop test.
The wheel is spun up
and the whole assembly
is then forced to the ground.
In 1957, the Britannia finally
made passenger service,
a full five years
after its promising debut.
REPORTER: Her teething troubles
over,
the long-range Bristol Britannia
goes to work in a big way.
The skipper, Albert Maher, on the
right, and members of his crew,
are ready at London Airport for the
first flight of the new non-stop
London to New York schedule.
The fastest transatlantic
air service in history.
Carrying 52 passengers,
the "Whispering Giant"
is the first British airliner
in regular commercial service
on the North American route.
One of the first to fly
the Britannia was former RAF pilot
Norman Tebbit, now Lord Tebbit.
Good gracious me!
It's a long time since I've been
on one of these.
Bit bigger than the old 100 series
that I flew.
This is the 300.
I suppose it looks all
very dated now,
with these old-fashioned
luggage racks.
Of course, this again
is the longer range version
so they've got a couple of bunks
as they flew longer hauls
across the North Atlantic
and things of that kind.
And here, onto the flight deck.
Quite a nice navigator's station.
You could sit there quite
comfortably, out of everybody's way.
Of course, here we've got a hatch,
there.
That's an escape hatch.
And here, the hatch for the sextant,
periscopic sextant.
Because we navigated an awful lot
in those days by astro.
The great thing about the Britannia
was you needed a flight engineer,
fairly heavy, who knew
the location of all the switches
and relays down in the hold,
underneath the flight deck, here.
Because this was before smart,
modern electronics
and everything was still
electromechanical.
So if something stuck and didn't
work, got a good engineer,
he would know which bit
of the flight deck floor
to jump up and down on
to loosen things up!
And here you are.
I was co-pilot and navigator
on these things
so I would be sitting up here
somewhere.
Oops. Oh, gosh.
Funny, not so easy to get into these
seats as it was when I was young.
And a slightly strange
control column here.
A funny yoke,
not terribly conventional.
Big handful of throttles. This
aeroplane was way ahead of the pack.
It was the first really very,
very electrical aeroplane.
That had a downside, of course,
in that if you lost the electrics,
you were in real big trouble.
That's when this switch came in
and basically, it would disconnect
all of the generators
and then reconnect them again
and you should get at least some of
your electrical services back again.
Of course, it was known, inevitably,
as the Jesus Christ switch,
because that was the only
occasion when you would use it,
when everybody on the flight deck
was saying, "Jesus Christ!"
You would grab it and hopefully,
all power would be restored.
Very useful!
It seemed that nothing could stop
the long-range turboprop
Britannia from conquering the
all-important North American market.
Could the Union Jack fly high again
over the good old US of A?
Well, yes, if you believed
Bristol's promotional film
but that was quite a big "if".
REPORTER: This is the Britannia.
The largest, most up-to-date
turboprop airliner in the world.
Mr Peter Masefield, managing
director of Bristol Aircraft Ltd,
heading a team of executives,
engineers and technicians,
introduced the Britannia
to the major airline bases
in 14 cities of America
in an unprecedented 24,000 mile tour
of the United States and Canada.
This "Whispering Giant" from England
is a real aeroplane. Yes, sir.
I think the Britannia could have
been a bigger seller
if it had gone into service earlier
but partly,
it would have been limited
by Bristol's own capacity
to produce in large numbers.
Howard Hughes was interested
in ordering the Britannia for TWA.
He actually flew it secretly
one morning on his own,
after meeting Bristol's
test pilots out in America
and came back and said that if he
could have 25 aeroplanes
in 18 months or whatever it was, he
would order it on the spot for TWA.
But Bristol were unable
to commit to producing that
because they didn't have
the capacity.
REPORTER: The tour was now over
and she returned to London airport
with the assurance that
soon her sister ships in number
would be following the trail
she successfully blazed
through the skies and across
the oceans, to the New World.
Despite the fanfare,
the order books told the story.
In the end,
there were no American orders.
None.
The idea was that you could build
a very successful jet prop plane.
Well, that's great, except that the
Americans were thinking,
"We're going to get across
the Atlantic in seven hours flat
"from London to New York."
And the Bristol Britannia
would kind of stumble its way there
in about 12 hours.
There have been some terrifying
miscalculations.
The Britannia was late and when she
did get into service,
for the first year
of her operation,
only half of the aircraft arrived
within an hour
of their scheduled time.
There was an all too public squabble
between the BOAC
and the Bristol company.
The real problem was that
the BOAC didn't want it.
So they kept on badmouthing it.
BOAC actually sort of bigged up
the safety issue
of icing in the engines
long after it had been solved
and they were actually
making this public.
It was extraordinary for an aircraft
they were contracted to buy.
BOAC didn't want the turboprop
Britannia,
they wanted a pure jet
and an American one.
They'd taken a shine to Boeing 707.
The Americans had joined
the jetliner race.
Britain no longer
had the skies to herself.
What chance do you think we have
of capturing the world market
with this long-range jet?
The resources of the Americans
are greater.
Their jet aeroplanes are going to be
backed up by big military contracts
and Boeing have already got a pretty
big tanker contract for the 707.
But despite that, I still think
we are capable of producing
an aeroplane as good as they are.
Why? What compensating
advantage have we?
Well, there is never any
substitute for brains,
even though it isn't supported by a
great mass of equipment,
as it is over there.
We have this experience on the Comet,
for which, again,
there is no substitute.
And the Comet will clearly become an
aeroplane again and will work again.
De Havilland did indeed rise
to the challenge.
In October 1958,
the new Comet 4 came into service
to take on the Americans.
She immediately became
the first pure jet liner
to cross the Atlantic.
The redesign had thicker
alloy for the fuselage
and the vulnerable square windows
were replaced by oval ones.
Lord Brabazon, at the public
enquiry into the Comet,
you said that in every step
in progress,
we have had to pay for it in blood
and treasure
and God knows that in this case,
we have paid in full.
Do you still feel that way?
I do, indeed.
It was a most expensive
but a very imaginative product
and we paid for it
but good will come from it,
because on the back
of our experience
and on the back of what was
learned in that enquiry,
other great machines in the world
have been built
and are flying today.
The new Comet was twice as large
and twice as powerful,
with its Rolls-Royce Avon engines.
The Comet had pioneered jet travel
and now defined an age.
And your name? Lord Kimberley.
Are you travelling for business
or for pleasure? Business.
It's one of the smoothest
flights I've been on.
Far less tiring
and really is the tops.
I think it's wonderful
because it's very silent,
it's very quick and you also get
the most wonderful view.
Were you at all nervous
about taking this flight?
Oh, not at all. Not a bit.
Why should I be?
With government encouragement,
BOAC did order 16 of the new
planes and other sales
went to Asia, Africa,
the Middle East and South America.
The Comet 4 was
the definitive version
of the most adventurous aircraft
in all civil aviation history.
As the late summers
of the '50s came to an end,
Britain's love affair with aircraft
continued under Hampshire skies.
It seemed that men in sheds could
make the most improbable possible.
And perhaps the most glorious
of these was the Fairey Rotodyne,
a mongrel mix of autogyro
and turbo jet.
It can go faster than a helicopter
and slower than
a fixed wing aeroplane.
I think it's one of the most
brilliant pieces
of advanced engineering
we've seen for a very long time.
It is a new way of flying.
Brilliant idea,
and it was well engineered.
What they hadn't taken into account
was the atrocious noise.
The jets on the tips of the rotor,
they could stop
a conversation at two miles.
It was intolerable.
There was no way.
It was a nice idea to have somebody
flying you in from Heathrow
to the South Bank or something,
very convenient for the city,
but it was obviously just not
possible to use the thing,
so it was axed.
The industry, too, was becoming
increasingly mismatched.
The designs were brilliant and many.
The sales were few.
The government needed to step in
to rationalise the business
if it was to succeed.
We were trying to cover
all the different specifications
on the military and civil sides.
There were a large number of British
firms and they were all too small.
That's one of the reasons
many of the aircraft were delayed.
The teams weren't big enough
to do the job.
In a series of painful
forced marriages,
Rolls-Royce emerged as the leading
engine manufacturer
and the 20 aerospace companies were
whittled down to two main groups,
Hawker Siddeley and BAC,
the British Aircraft Corporation.
It would be down to BAC to mount
the final British challenge
to Boeing for the big jet market.
In 1962, a new British star took
to the air - polished, refined,
with a licence to thrill.
It was Britain's final riposte
to the brash Americans.
It was powerful, Savile Row suited,
the name was VC, VC10.
The VC10 was a magnificent aircraft.
There should be no
question about that.
It looks absolutely superb,
whether you see it
on film or in the ten.
It's a delight. It's a piece of
aviation sculpture. There was
something thrilling in the way it
took off like a jetfighter, rather
than a lumbering Airbus of today.
VC10, romance in the sky,
adventure, Boy's Own, Dan Dare,
the Eagle.
All those things, utterly thrilling.
The VC10 does do a very
different job to the Boeing.
It's been designed to operate out
of the short airfields with
high temperature conditions which
are so important to large airlines
like the OAC
on the Commonwealth routes.
Why was it necessary
to come into this market?
The big jet market is a great
part of the airline scene
and I think if we are to preserve
the aircraft industry,
which is a great national asset,
it exports perhaps 150 million
per year, we need to develop
an aircraft like the VC10.
The last of the all-British
great jets has to be the VC10.
And this was a final riposte to the
Americans. They brought us the 707,
which, for decades,
was going to dominate aviation.
We hit back with a plane
which was much more sophisticated
in its design.
The VC10 looked wonderful.
It had its engines at the back,
so the cabin was supremely quiet.
It was fast.
It's still a world record holder
for a subsonic airliner flight.
It was quick, comfortable
and it could go almost anywhere.
It's astonishing,
but 50 years later, only Concorde
has crossed the Atlantic faster
than our last great passenger jet.
I do this trip from Nairobi
to London every year and this is
by far the most quiet and
most comfortable one I can remember.
The VC10 was deeply loved
by passengers.
That was a great selling point. It's
very seldom you get people coming off
aircraft saying,
what a wonderful aircraft that was,
but they did on the VC10.
People would ask to fly on it.
They would postpone their flights
if they couldn't.
I think it's an extremely
comfortable plane. Very smooth.
Very quiet. The seating is most
comfortable and plenty of legroom.
It seems to travel so serenely.
When you hit turbulence,
it doesn't ride turbulence
like other airlines.
It has a very stiff wing,
so it doesn't juggle you about,
like the average aircraft.
And, of course, the one advantage
the aeroplane always had that made it
so successful was the fact that
the engines were on the tail.
Of course, consequently,
it is a very quiet interior.
Also, for a nervous person who
doesn't really like flying,
it could take off two-thirds quicker
than a 707, so you were 1,000 feet
above the runway
when the 707 was still sitting on it.
The VC10 was
sold on its passenger experience
and part of this was down
to the cabin crew.
They also preferred
the aircraft to the 707.
When you compared it to the 707,
which I also went on for a short
period, it was the most amazing
aircraft because it was neat,
it was small, it was very fast
and it is only 144 passengers,
but it was the latest jet plane
that everyone was quite
excited to fly in.
The 707 was much noisier and also
the landing, I always thought
was a controlled crash all the time.
Bang! Bang! Down the runway.
The VC10 was very smooth, it glided
off, glided down. It was very smooth.
I think the passengers
preferred the VC10.
The hostesses may have
loved the aircraft,
but were not always
so keen on the designer uniforms.
Paper dresses were on this route.
I'm sure it was New York
down to the Caribbean.
You were issued
with this paper dress.
In New York, even if it was snowing,
you trot onto the aircraft,
we had these big raincoats,
but when you took it off,
you were wearing this paper dress.
They were more or less all the same
size. They had a string at the back.
If you had any bust,
it struck straight out in front.
They had to be two or three
inches above the knee,
you were supposed to wear them.
We were issued with tights.
And all the boys used to
get the scissors out and try
and cut them shorter and shorter.
Green plastic shoes with plastic
jewels on and a flower in your hair.
Hideous. Horrendous.
And a row of three VC10s and you
don't know which one you were on,
you trot up the steps and say,
"Are you going down the Caribbean?"
all shy and flustered.
And they'd say, "Why?"
You go like this!
"No, no. It's not this one, dear,
it's that one."
Yet once again, Britain was making
a technically advanced aircraft
to the specifications
of one company.
A company, BOAC,
that was often referred to
as the "Boeing Only
Aircraft Corporation"...
..such was its addiction
to buying the Seattle jet.
No British aircraft could
succeed without the backing
of the state airlines and relying on
that could be a pact with the devil.
The BBC's Money Programme
interviewed Britain's own Dr No,
the chairman of BOAC.
He damned the VC10
with faint praise.
It's a lovely aeroplane to fly,
I've flown it myself.
I think it has one little drawback
and that is that you have to get
an awful lot of extra
people in it before it makes money.
It's a really sad story that the
BOAC, who specified the aeroplane,
turned against it when they realised
that the 707 was actually
more economical to fly.
The reason it was more
economical to fly
was because the 707 had been
built for very long runways.
The VC10 had been designed
specifically for BOAC's requirement
to get out of shorter
runways at high altitude
in places like Nairobi
on the Empire routes.
It had a bigger wing,
with high-lift devices,
and the tail-mounted engines.
This made it heavier and
therefore burned a bit more fuel.
So BOAC actually tried to get
out of part of their VC10 order
in order to buy more 707s,
which didn't really help its image
with the rest of the world
when you were trying to
sell it to other airlines.
The airline corporations
were more or less strong-armed
into buying British.
They had probably an excessive
influence on the design
of the aircraft because they
were tailored for their needs
without looking at
the wider world as a market.
The aircraft were too
closely tailored,
and then inevitably, minds changed,
commerce developed and the airlines
didn't then really quite want
what they'd said they wanted.
And in the end, airlines tend
to go for operating costs
and reliability, rather than
the last bit of perfection.
The American 707
went on to sell over 1,000.
The British VC10, a mere 54.
A proud line of all British big jets
to challenge the Americans
had come to an end.
And in 1966,
the final sad twist.
The Farnborough airshow, so long the
best of British, went international.
'For the first time, foreign
aircraft are on show at Farnborough.
'Bristol Siddeley powers four
of them, an Orpheus engine
'in the Fiat jet trainer
in air force service
with Italy and Germany.'
The hard truth was that there were
simply not enough British planes
to fill our top show.
'Rolls-Royce is sponsoring three
overseas aircraft, the Fokker
'Friendship with two Rolls turbo
props is an airliner from Holland.'
A wonderful creative age
was drawing to a close.
For so many years, Farnborough
had been a showcase of British
aviation, civil and military.
The skies were full
of the fastest and highest,
the most menacing,
and the most adventurous.
There was a great deal of very good
design in Britain at that time,
but in the end, we just simply
didn't have the capacity, the people,
the finances, to do all
the things that we were trying.
Perhaps we were trying
to do too many things
and not really carry
forward enough of them.
It was so nearly a bloody great era,
but it was screwed up
by lousy management,
hideously missed political decisions
and also bad specification
on the part of the airlines.
But what is often overlooked
is that we are still
a major aerospace player.
In fact, we're number one in Europe
and people don't realise that.
We're second only to the
United States in terms of aerospace.
But there were some wonderful
aircraft. The Comet.
It should have been the greatest
thing ever. For two years, it was.
Passengers thought it really was.
The Americans themselves thought it
had left them six years behind.
Very sad. But wow,
there were some great aircraft!
For two decades,
we had ruled the skies
and consistently broken records
with amazing aircraft
that were loved by crew
and passengers alike.
We had the first turbo-prop plane,
the world-beating Vickers Viscount.
The first jetliner, the sleek silver
De Havilland Comet.
And the VC10,
powerful and athletic
and still an Atlantic record holder.
In that golden age of invention
and confidence,
Britain had created
magnificent planes.
Aircraft that changed the way
that the world would fly forever.
Subtitles by Red Bee Media Ltd